---
title: What We Learned in 2016
date: 2017-03-07 15:05:00 Z
---

OTI and RAD are conducting a community-led field scan of &quot;technology use in the public interest&quot;  that centers diverse practitioners and identifies challenges and opportunities. This field scan will identify people, groups, institutions, and networks in the space, and explore how best to foster the growth of the field. This is a participatory research project that will be guided by Project Partners (practitioners) and an Advisory Board including allied organizations. During the first phase of the project, we began with interviews of 23 people from a wide range of organizations that work on technology and social change. We analyzed interviews for common themes, and created a data gallery of powerful [pull quotes from our interviews](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1OCtKFBMozOTj-Nk48XQDYys_ZF3qgN87gGuBDBByN3U/edit?usp=sharing).  Next, we used this data gallery for a workshop at the_ [Code for America Summit](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1NhYHEZyNHZxqegsrpz3f8-4jEa_lnhlI8_MKqcXqg-I/edit), where approximately 30 people provided feedback to key questions, discussed the quotes, and gave examples from their own experience. We also conducted a workshop at the [New America Growing the Public Technology Ecosystem event](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1OVVCALuq4EIys43eKp-PvciFKhM6rbwo4SZHhHhceiQ/edit). Additionally, we developed an [annotated bibliography](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1VbfG8iEILxiGlpKrSmEJbGJqFYd6XeItVbtAEJd5Y00/edit) and compiled [a list of over 600 public interest technology projects, companies, and organizations](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1jwM-cYI1Ep9ZjNxGDjJXjqNkYA-f1ViyAH-Bv1tLvV4/edit?usp=sharing). This list powers a [website for the project](https://opentechinstitute.github.io/public-interest-tech-site/orglist/)that we plan to further develop and make public. We produced 6 short, punchy profiles based on interviews (currently being reviewed by practitioners for public presentation) of key practitioners in the field, to be published in 2017.

Most crucially, after reviewing the field, we selected and invited a cohort of key actors to join us as project partners for the second, participatory phase of research. This document summarizes key findings to date.

## "Public Interest Technology/Technologist" as a frame

In interviews, data gallery discussion, and literature review, we explored the resonance of "public interest technology"; as a frame. We also asked people if they considered themselves a "public interest technologist," and why or why not. We found:

- There are a number of intersecting communities of practice in the broader field that we have been calling &quot;public interest technology.&quot;** There is some overlap between these communities of practice, but each has its own history, network of key actors, value system, and ways of working. The most prominent of these are: open data, civic tech, tech policy, and community technology.  Based on the literature, our scan of existing organizations and projects, and our phase 1 interviews, we created [this taxonomy of  various communities of practice within &#39;public interest tech.&#39;](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Gsp-vpzktyE4xZA0H9Wq_CDhdRBDXxZV1-FrMqnQyGA/edit)
- Only tech policy advocates currently use the term public interest technology.** The only practitioners in the field who currently use the term &quot;public interest technology&quot; or &quot;public interest technologist&quot; are those involved in developing technology policy at public interest legal organizations. Among all other interviewees, reactions to the term was mixed. Some, mostly within the civic tech community, find the term interesting and exciting; some feel it might be a useful umbrella but don&#39;t have strong feelings about it. Some argue that the term is problematic, and discuss the potential harms of introducing a new term (see next point).
- Some interviewees feel that it may be harmful to use a new, funder-driven term**.  They note that doing so decenters the terms and ways of thinking that have emerged organically from community-driven technology work. This marginalization has material impacts. As one interviewee noted, people scramble to reframe their work according to funder &#39;hype cycles;&#39; these cycles also enable those with access to social capital in funding circles (typically, highly educated white cismen) to capture resources and momentum even in areas that have longstanding community-led activity.
- Support for the field must not be limited to people who identify as &#39;technologists.&#39;** For example, several interviewees said that people who can &quot;translate&quot; technology play an important role in many public interest organizations, often more so than technologists who develop software.
- Community technology, social movement technology, and/or technology for social justice, may be frameworks that better capture the most effective approaches to using technology for social good.** Whether or not NetGain and the broader field continue to use &#39;public interest technology,&#39; we feel it is crucial to include the voices and perspectives of those who work within the frameworks of community technology, social movement technology, and/or technology for social justice. These communities are the closest in practice to the ideals of community-led, community-based, and accountable use of technology that are espoused by many across the broader field.

## Personal Pathways, Barriers, and Support

We asked people about the type of work they do, their pathway into the work, the biggest barriers they face, and crucial support they received along the way from other people, institutions, or events. Key takeaways from this section:

- Pathways are split between those who moved from &#39;tech to public interest&#39; and those who moved from &#39;community organizing to tech **.**&#39;** Some moved from a career in the technology industry or a background in computer science into activism and/or a public interest organization, or, more commonly among those we interviewed, from activist or public interest work into a stronger focus on using technology to support those goals. In other words: many public interest technologists began as activists and taught themselves how to be technologists; some public interest technologists began as computer scientists but later pursued public interest work.
- Educational pathways are unpredictable; most are predominantly self-taught, or learn outside of a university classroom.** Most participants struggled to define where exactly they had learned the technology skills they use in their work; many emphasized that they acquired skills through relevant work experience, online, or through ad-hoc skillshares and workshops.
- Race, class, gender identity, sexual orientation, immigration status, disability, and other axes of structural inequality continue to shape people&#39;s access to tech work, in all of the areas of &#39;public interest tech.&#39;** The majority of visibility and funding in the space go to white straight cis men with educational and class privilege. However, this is less often the case in the community technology space, which has more leadership by people from marginalized groups, and where structural inequality is openly understood and discussed. At the same time, these spaces receive far less funding and visibility overall, despite best implementing many of the practices described as desirable by most interviewees, such as participatory design, diverse participants, and sustained community ownership of projects.
- Mentorship is critically important** for training and retaining new practitioners, especially those from groups are underrepresented in the sector(s).
- Crucial support also came from fellowship opportunities and conferences.** Several interviewees mentioned the Allied Media Conference as an important space for support and growth, as well as the Code for America Summit, Netroots Nation, the Chaos Communication Congress, DEF CON, bootcamps, and hack nights, as well as self-paced online learning tools, among other spaces.
- There are already many &#39;accidental technologists&#39; from underrepresented backgrounds in community organizing, advocacy, and nonprofit work, who should be recognized and supported.** Many don&#39;t think of themselves as &#39;technologists,&#39; and are not plugged into the networks of technologists mentioned above, but are still key to the success of existing community technology infrastructures. Too often these people do incredible work but are under-resourced and not seen by the broader, professionalized civic tech space. Funders should develop mechanisms to support and lift them up. One interviewee put it this way: &quot;It&#39;s about bringing the expert out in people, not bringing the expert to the people.&quot;
- The inability of nonprofit and public sector work to offer **competitive salaries and a positive working environment** are perceived as issues for recruiting and retaining technologists.
- Tangible support for cultural transformation is needed to build the field in ways that are inclusive, diverse, equitable and aligned with the values of technology for social justice**.  Sexist and racist culture pushes people out of certain types of public interest tech work. Lack of resources for cultural transformation within the field and sustaining work limits any individual&#39;s ability to work on these issues.
- Organizations need more support understanding the kinds of technology and data work their organization needs, the kinds of skill sets a person requires to do this work and how to support this person to be well utilized and placed within their organization**. When people, with public interest technology skills, are able to connect to opportunities, they are frequently underutilized or misutilized.

## Future of the Field

We asked interviewees and data gallery workshop participants to discuss the future of their field, including: examples of successful and unsuccessful projects; key people in their field; who is under-resourced; what needs to change for the field to thrive in the future; and key lessons for funders.

- The most successful projects emerged directly from the goals of an existing, non-tech-focused organization**; more broadly, successful approaches included collaborative design, user research, and/or human-centered design processes. According to our interviewees, participatory design is a vital factor in ensuring that new technological tools are useful to the communities they are intended to serve.
- Most participants pointed to a lack of community input or involvement as a central problem in many public interest software projects**. Some participants more specifically highlighted the problematic focus on software development expertise to the detriment of community organizing, or other types of expertise, and the recent trend of sending technologists into distant communities temporarily, rather than building capacity from within that community.
- Projects that focus only on &#39;innovation&#39; tend to fail; community ownership, maintenance, and long-term sustainability of tech projects are crucial, but too often overlooked, aspects of success.** Far too often, resources are concentrated in &#39;innovation,&#39; prototype development and initial rollout, done by experts who parachute in; such projects collapse after the funding ends and the outsiders depart. After a temporary infusion of technology and technologists, through a &quot;tour of duty&quot; or fellowship model, maintenance and sustainability of the new technology is often an issue.
- Basic tech support and ongoing maintenance is the most critical need for many nonprofits and community-based organizations**, but is &#39;unsexy&#39; and underfunded compared to resources for &#39;hot new prototypes&#39; and the latest platform.
- Worker-owned tech cooperatives provide a possible sustainable approach to building community technology capacity**; with initial support from foundations, credit unions, city economic development programs, and other sources of startup capital, they may be a mechanism for long-term tech capacity that can outlast temporary funder trends in the nonprofit sector.
- Many public interest technologists believe that it is important to use Free/Libre and Open Source software (F/LOSS).** F/LOSS provides opportunitiesfor resource pooling,  sharing, improved security, community control, and autonomy. However, creating and maintaining open source alternatives to common corporate platforms requires widespread coordination that has often been hard to organize in the absence of long term resources (funding and business models) to support this work.
- Alternative educational approaches to tech skill development, such as code bootcamps, after school programs, and  hackerspaces, especially those focused on learners from groups currently underrepresented in tech, are an important piece of the puzzle.** These are increasingly available, in spaces such as Black Girls Code, Liberating Ourselves Locally, Hack the Hood, #YesWeCode, Digital Stewards, Mayfirst&#39;s People of Color Techie program, alternative credentialing systems, and others, but need to be better resourced by funders in the space.
- Funders can support existing citywide coalitions of community-based organizations to integrate technology access and community control into their goals.** Successful models include Philadelphia, Detroit, and NYC, all cities where strong networks of CBOs worked with city administrations to secure federal broadband funding, secure concessions from telecommunications firms, increase broadband access for low income residents, and more.
- Public interest technologists are often focused on doing work where markets fail, where they harm people, or where they mishandle public goods.** In contexts  where there is market effort, solutions are often terrible and still do not actually solve the problem that non-profits/mission orgs face. Many public interest technologists lament a lack of research into whether technology projects work or have significant impact. At the same time, open source tools have insufficient resources or support for community use to provide stable, viable solutions.

## Threats

In interviews and workshops, many participants discussed threats they felt must be addressed by the field. The following stood out as repeated concerns:

- Top-down approaches to using technology for social good are not only unsustainable and likely to fail, in some cases they are actually harmful to the communities they intend to benefit.** For example, in NYC, one interviewee noted that well-meaning techies who focused on setting up free wireless access points in low-income neighborhoods without involving existing residents contributed to gentrification; in Boston, open data advocates who meant to help low-income residents secured open access to housing court data, but the data was primarily used by landlords to blacklist tenants.
- Now more than ever, organizational security is crucial for advocates in general, and for the most targeted communities specifically.** Funders need to support the already existing networks of domestic QT, POC, and WOC-led security trainers who are being asked to provide digital security trainings to grassroots organizations across the country.

## Funding approaches

Interviewees and workshop participants raised concerns about funding models and methods. The following are some of the themes:

- Funding structures need to take into account the **different kinds of timelines** that exist for technology projects.
- Some participants were frustrated by what they perceived to be **funding for projects based on hype rather than on strategic vision**.
- Funders should understand that **a venture capital strategy may not work for nonprofit organizations** , even if that organization is making technology products.
- Technology projects need different kinds of funding than typical philanthropic projects**.
- Many groups, especially volunteer software development projects, **do not know how to write a grant or find funding.**

## Summary of Outputs from Stage 1

- [Taxonomy of types of public interest tech work people are currently doing and findings from the first nine interviews](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Gsp-vpzktyE4xZA0H9Wq_CDhdRBDXxZV1-FrMqnQyGA/edit)
- [Annotated bibliography](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1VbfG8iEILxiGlpKrSmEJbGJqFYd6XeItVbtAEJd5Y00/edit)
- Notes from [the Code for America Summit](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1NhYHEZyNHZxqegsrpz3f8-4jEa_lnhlI8_MKqcXqg-I/edit), and the [New America Growing the Public Technology Ecosystem](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1OVVCALuq4EIys43eKp-PvciFKhM6rbwo4SZHhHhceiQ/edit) [event](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1OVVCALuq4EIys43eKp-PvciFKhM6rbwo4SZHhHhceiQ/edit)
- 23 interview transcripts
  - [Data gallery from interviews](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1OCtKFBMozOTj-Nk48XQDYys_ZF3qgN87gGuBDBByN3U/edit?usp=sharing)
  - [Semi-structured interview guide](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Y_AT8BWtXOwvBPpdtbt8r4qJB0aa30oQkLmUSX6NC_E/edit)
  - [Major Themes from first 9 Interviews](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1J95Je_U4CLy5y1QPs1G-PSWU2fcM1OyE3dFZzrZAJlE/edit#heading=h.paca6i32rygn) doc
- [List of projects, organizations, and companies doing public interest technology work](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1jwM-cYI1Ep9ZjNxGDjJXjqNkYA-f1ViyAH-Bv1tLvV4/edit?usp=sharing) (note: this spreadsheet is being fed directly into the [website](https://opentechinstitute.github.io/public-interest-tech-site/orglist/), which is still in development)
- Research Partner MOUs for the engagement of individuals and organizations in the next stage of the research project (see confirmed and invited partners below)